After watching the 2020 Regional Convention in her native language of Cicewa, 16-year-old
Lisa from Malawi stated,
With this convention, I saw how Jehovah fulfilled his promise at Hebrews chapter 13 verse 5.
I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.
Many have made similar appreciative comments after watching the Convention in their language.
You have made kind donations online at donate.jw.org, and by other means.
Thank you for these donations that support our extensive translation efforts.
Earlier in our program, we discussed five piece records that we should put away.
But what can we do if peace has been disturbed?
Can it be restored?
And if so, how?
We invite you to pay careful attention to the following four-part symposium.
Brother John Ekran, a helper to the coordinators committee, will start us off with the talk,
seek peace and pursue it, by not quickly taking offense.
The title of this series of four talks is Seek, Peace, and Pursuit, and it's based
on 1 Peter chapter 3 and verse 11.
Let's read that together.
1 Peter chapter 3 and verse 11.
Let him turn away from what is bad, and do what is good.
Let him seek peace and pursue it.
Yes, we have to pursue peace, and pursuit requires effort.
If you ever had to chase a piece of paper that was in your hands and got blown away by the wind,
and just when you get to it, the wind blows it away again and again, it can really take
quite some effort to retrieve and get that paper back in your hands.
Just standing there and watching the paper blow further and further away is not going
to get it back.
Well peace can be a lot like that paper.
At some point, it can get blown away, and we have to then chase or pursue it to get
that piece back again.
This series of talks will help us to pursue peace in four ways, by not quickly taking
offense, by apologizing, by forgiving freely, and by using our gift of speech wisely.
Let's consider our first way to pursue peace, avoid quickly taking offense.
Now because we are imperfect, we might misjudge others and quickly take offense.
Notice that we say quickly take offense.
That's an important word.
We need to avoid jumping to conclusions quickly before we actually have the facts.
Even faithful men like Jesus apostles have taken offense too quickly.
You may recall the time that Jesus and His apostles were looking for lodging in a Samaritan
village.
Now the Samaritans in that village rudely denied them lodging.
At Luke 9 verses 54 through 56, the apostles James and John say to Jesus, Lord, do you
want us to call fire down from heaven and annihilate them?
But Jesus rebukes them for their rash and rather violent suggestion.
Luke of the serious consequences had Jesus yielded to the violent temper of James and
John.
The Samaritans could have become prejudiced against the kingdom message.
Instead, Jesus pursues a peaceful solution.
The account says they simply went to a different village.
Now, does this mean we're saying I can never take offense?
No, you may have a legitimate cause for complaint.
The key point is that we should not quickly draw conclusions before we hear all the facts.
Proverbs chapter 18 and verse 13 says,
When anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts, it is foolish and humiliating.
In the following dramatization, know what helps one sister to overlook an offense.
And they expected more from you.
Haley, what are you talking about?
Got to pin about my posts.
You doubt lonely that you've got nothing better to do.
Haley?
Wait, please.
I don't know what's happening.
Did you talk to Emily about my posts?
Yes, we do.
Do you gossiped about me?
No, why would I look up to you?
You're supposed to be the mature one and you're just like Emily busy running your
Haley.
Look, I can see you're upset.
But trust me, this is a huge misunderstanding.
I love you.
I would never, ever say anything behind your back.
So please calm down.
Some days I just feel so alone between Nana and work.
And then knowing all of you were talking about me.
I promise that's not what happened.
You're just really tired and overwhelmed.
So why don't we just slow things down a little?
You know, meetings always make me feel better, even on my worst days.
Why don't we go inside, clean up a little, enjoy the program together.
Then afterwards, we can all talk.
I promise it'll be okay.
Haley really was upset.
She'd already concluded that she was being gossiped about by everyone.
If we find ourselves like Haley feeling offended, how can we avoid quickly taking offense?
Well we must stop and think.
Let's read Ecclesiastes chapter 7 and verse 9 for some very good advice in these situations.
Ecclesiastes chapter 7 and verse 9 do not be quick to take offense.
For the taking of offense lodges in the bosom of fools.
Like Celia said in the parking lot to Haley, please calm down.
So in those situations, we need to think about what you know and just as importantly what
you don't know.
You know what you were told happened, but what was really said?
In the video, Haley quickly believed what she was told.
She did not even ask Celia what she really said.
Or you may know what was said, but do you know what was really meant by it?
Haley asked, did you talk about my posts?
And Celia said yes, and immediately Haley assumed the worst.
Or perhaps we misjudged the person who heard us.
Haley misjudged Celia on the spot by saying, you're just as bad as Emily.
She had not even heard from Celia yet.
Haley said to Celia, she was the mature one, the one she looked up to.
And yet she was quick to believe the worst about her.
Haley had not stopped and really thought about what she was thinking and saying.
Perhaps she was having a hard day.
Well Celia really set a fine example for us.
Even though Haley spoke harshly to her, Celia was calm and listened to Haley.
As Haley explained how she was feeling lonely, dealing and caring for her grandmother,
you can see the love and concern that Celia had for Haley, even though just moments before
she had spoken really harshly to her.
Well besides taking time to think things through, we also need to remember that it is Jehovah's
opinion of us that matters the most.
Now, that's an important point, especially when we deal with misunderstandings or false
accusations.
Think about it.
Jehovah is an eyewitness to everything.
Dilustrate that I want you to imagine.
You had a traffic accident.
Now you were just sitting at the stop sign, but another car ran straight into you.
Now, police come and the person that ran into you says that you ran into them and the police
believed them.
You take the matter to court.
The judge listens.
As the other person says that you ran into them, however, before you can say anything, the
judge says, no, that is not what happened.
I was there walking on the sidewalk across the street that day and I saw the whole thing.
Well, it's extremely likely that you can go to court and expect the judge for your case
to have been an eyewitness.
This does illustrate, though, the peace of mind that we can have knowing that Jehovah
is an eyewitness to all that happens.
So when falsely accused, or we have a misunderstanding that we cannot seem to clear up, it is of great
comfort for us to know that Jehovah was there that day and saw the whole thing.
We don't need to take offense at every negative thing that is said or done around us or feel
we have to defend ourselves as right on every occasion.
We would surely wear out emotionally and probably not have very many friends.
We should be willing to overlook minor transgressions.
Let's look at Proverbs 19 and verse 11.
Proverbs 19 and verse 11, what can help us?
The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger.
And it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense.
So can you overlook an offense?
As the Proverbs said, that is beauty on our part.
If not and you have a serious cause for complaint, handle matters according to Jehovah's direction,
show insight, slow down any anger.
Take carefully and listen patiently to make sure you clearly have all the facts before
you become offended or take action.
Remember that piece of paper that you had in your hands and got blown away by the wind?
What if it was a hundred dollar bill?
You would make every effort to pursue it and get it back because it is valuable.
Our piece with our brothers is far more valuable than paper money.
When our piece with our brothers or sisters is blown away by misunderstandings, mistakes,
or sin, then you should pursue peace.
Try hard to get it back.
Yes, we glorify God and promote peace when we avoid quickly taking offense.
Brother Ralph Walls, a helper to the Personnel Committee, will now present the next talk
of this symposium, seek peace and pursue it by apologizing.
I am so sorry.
It's my fault, please forgive me.
No matter how we phrase it, it can be difficult to apologize.
Why is that so challenging?
There are many reasons.
We may fear confrontation, lame or rejection.
Perhaps we feel embarrassed and we are too proud to apologize.
We may reason, apologizing will not undo the blunder I have already made.
And it may even be that we are angry.
This is such a matter of concern that in July 2000, the California State Legislature in
the United States passed a bill designed to relieve people of liability if they express
sympathy to an individual who was injured in an accident in which they themselves were
involved.
It was noted that people often hesitate to extend an apology out of concern that it
could be construed in court as an admission of guilt.
The Bible provides an account of a faithful servant, the Apostle Paul, who was a good example
of one who apologized.
The account is in the Book of Acts, chapter 23.
The setting, a Roman military officer wanted to know why Paul was being accused by the Jews.
So he brought Paul to the Jewish chief priests and commanded the Sanhedrin, the high court,
to assemble.
As we read Acts chapter 23 verses 1 through 5 together, we can't help but be impressed
by Paul's boldness as he stands for what is right.
But at the same time, please take note of his humility.
Acts 23.
Looking intently at the Sanhedrin, Paul said,
Men, brothers, I have behaved before God with a perfectly clear conscience down to this
day.
At this, the high priest and an I has ordered those standing by him to strike him on the
mouth.
Then Paul said to him, God is going to strike you, you white washed wool.
Do you sit to judge me according to the law and at the same time violate the law by commanding
me to be struck?
Those standing by said, are you insulting the high priest of God?
And Paul said, brothers, I did not know he was high priest.
For it is written, you must not speak injuriously of a ruler of your people.
Paul immediately admitted his error.
And he had said that the one appointed as judge should not resort to violence was right.
Yet he apologized.
In the following dramatization, we will see an older sister applying the inspired words
of Titus chapter 2 verses 3 through 5 in order to advise younger sisters to be sound
in mind.
We will also observe how one of the younger sisters avoids further problems and pursues
peace by humbly apologising.
I don't know how this happened, but Haley, I'm sorry.
It hurts me to see you so upset, if you too.
First, what you heard was not what I said.
Well, I thought that's how you felt, and even if I got that part wrong.
All this drama, let's stop, come on, girls, Haley, come closer.
Love is patient and kind, it's not jealous.
It doesn't become provoked, even when things become difficult.
So what are we going to do?
I just thought they've been.
No, I'm sorry, Haley.
I'm sorry, I shouldn't have judged you so harshly, I shouldn't have judged you at all,
and I'm sorry for dragging you into this, but twisting what you said.
It's okay, things happen.
I've been on both ends.
I should never have spoken that way to you, Celia.
To either of you, I'm to know.
I'll call you tomorrow.
The older sister apologized, even though she was not in the wrong.
She also urged the two younger sisters to make peace.
It takes courage, humility, and determination to apologize.
It's interesting to know what stated at Philippians 2 and verse 3.
Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism.
But with humility, consider others superior to you.
That means our determined effort is not to win an argument, which could be contentious.
Nor do we want to start a discussion with the primary thought being that we are in the
right, that mean that we are self-concerned or egotistical.
Rather, in harmony with the principle of that scripture, we want to act with humility.
Our aim should be to pursue peace.
Even if we think the other person is being unreasonable, we apologize.
Why is it so important to do so?
Because that is what makes our worship to Jehovah acceptable.
At Matthew chapter 5, verses 23 and 24, Jesus makes it very clear.
If then, you are bringing your gift to the altar.
And there you remember that your brother has something against you.
Leave your gift there in front of the altar and go away.
First, make your peace with your brother.
And then come back and offer your gift.
One Bible scholar describes the scene this way.
The worshipper has entered the temple.
He has passed through its series of courts, the court of the Gentiles, the court of the women,
the court of the men.
Beyond that, there lay the court of the priests, into which the laymen could not go.
The worshipper is standing at the rail, ready to hand over his living animal to the priest.
At that critical moment, the worshipper remembers that his brother has something
against him.
What is he to do?
Leave your gift there in front of the altar, Jesus explains.
And go away.
What does Jesus say is more important in offering up a sacrifice?
First, make peace with your brother.
Then, when you have come back, offer up your gift.
The expression rendered make your peace means to reconcile.
Jesus' words teach a crucial lesson.
Reconciliation or peace comes before sacrifice.
The way we treat fellow worshippers has a direct bearing on our relationship with God.
1 John 4 verse 20 pointedly says,
For the one who does not love his brother whom he has seen,
cannot love God whom he has not seen.
If we find ourselves in a situation when we have offended a fellow worshipper,
we want to apply Jesus' counsel.
We want to take the initiative to approach our brother or sister.
We may need to acknowledge their hurt feelings.
We may also need to ask, what can I do to make amends?
Often, a sincere apology is all that is needed.
Although our worship today no longer includes animal sacrifices,
what Jesus was teaching emphasizes that there is a connection between
peace with our brother and acceptable worship to God.
When two humans are at odds,
there may be a measure of blame on both sides,
since both are imperfect and prone to error.
This usually calls for mutual concessions.
Even if only the one apologizing is right.
The issue is not so much who is right and who is wrong,
but who will take the initiative to make peace.
When the Apostle Paul heard that the Christians in Corinth
were taking fellow servants of God to secular courts over personal differences,
he said, why do you not rather let yourself be wrong?
But why do you not rather let yourself be defrauded?
The principle is clear.
Peace among fellow believers is more important than proving who is right and who is wrong.
Keeping this in mind makes it easier to apologize for wrong that someone thinks
we've committed against him or her.
A heart-felt apology can open the way to a constructive conversation.
It can minimize problems and restore peace.
Brother Lynette Myers, a helper to the writing committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium.
Seek peace and pursue it by forgiving freely.
It's a simple fact that to be at peace with others,
we must be willing to forgive.
Please notice two examples.
A father and his teenage daughter didn't get along.
Minor disagreements often developed into shouting matches.
Finally, the tension got so bad that the daughter was asked to leave the house.
Eventually, she recognized that she was at fault and asked for her father's forgiveness.
But instead of overlooking her mistakes, her father rejected her efforts.
He was unwilling to extend forgiveness to his own daughter.
Now, let's contrast that with another example.
A blameless man was condemned to die for a crime he didn't commit.
Shortly before he died, the innocent man stated,
father forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.
Those words of Jesus are recorded at Luke chapter 23 verse 34.
And he may have been referring to the Roman soldiers who drove the nails into his hands and feet
and who didn't know who he really was.
Or Jesus may have had in mind some in the crowd who demanded his execution
but would later exercise faith in him.
The point is that Jesus was willing to forgive freely.
How do we measure up with regard to forgiveness?
Are we like Jesus willing to forgive others freely?
Or at times do we tend to be more like the man who was unwilling to forgive?
Granting forgiveness isn't always easy.
Imperfection exerts a powerful influence over us, sometimes robbing us of compassion.
When someone hurts us, we may become resentful or hold a grudge.
And perhaps some of us were taught not to forgive others.
Little wonder that cultivating a peaceful forgiving spirit can be difficult.
Still, the Bible encourages us to forgive freely.
Let's consider another example of forgiveness in the man Job.
And we're familiar with his trials, loss of his possessions and ten children,
a loathsome disease, and his wife told him to curse God and die.
Three companions heard about Job's calamities and they agreed to go comfort him.
Job chapter 2 verse 13 states that when they arrived,
they sat with him for seven days and seven nights, but they didn't say a word to him.
Now maybe that was a good thing, because when they finally opened their mouths,
they deeply hurt Job with their baseless accusations.
But notice something interesting about this account.
Please turn with me to Job chapter 42.
At the end of Job's trials, Jehovah asked Job to do something regarding these false
accusers.
Notice Jehovah's words there, Job 42, the B portion of verse 8.
And my servant Job will pray for you.
I will surely accept his request not to deal with you according to your foolishness.
Did you notice?
After all the false accusations,
Jehovah asked Job to pray for the men who had tormented him.
Now, would Job tell Jehovah?
Jehovah, after what they said to me,
I'm not going to forgive them.
Would Job be resentful?
Notice the latter portion of verse 9.
And Jehovah accepted Job's prayer.
Job followed Jehovah's instructions.
What was the result of Job's integrity and his forgiving spirit?
Verse 10.
After Job had prayed for his companions,
Jehovah removed Job's tribulation and restored his prosperity.
Jehovah gave him double what he had before.
The account goes on to say that Job had 10 more children.
He lived for 140 more years and for 17 states.
Finally, Job died after a long and satisfying life.
Job was blessed for his forgiving spirit.
And he set a good example for us to forgive freely.
In the following dramatization with Celia and Haley,
notice why Haley finally decides to forgive freely.
Been thinking of you, right, broadcast?
How did you like the neurovigil?
I'm sorry.
Yes, I can't.
Yeah, I wish you could give her a rest.
Sorry?
Oh, nothing.
I'm sorry.
It's just Emily for the millionth time.
What's the problem, love?
There's no problem.
It's just difficult to let her back in.
Not that simple.
You want to forgive, but I'll get burned again.
Keep in mind, a chance to forgive is a chance to imitate
Jehovah.
We wouldn't want to miss that opportunity.
I never thought about it like that.
Think back to a time when you wanted forgiveness,
when it meant everything.
How did it feel?
Just like, you feel awful.
That you've let everyone down.
They forgive you.
Suddenly everything's okay.
Emily, sorry, I haven't been back to you.
Plans for tomorrow.
What good reasoning on the part of Celia?
Did you notice the expression that really touched Haley's heart?
A chance to forgive is a chance to imitate Jehovah.
We wouldn't want to miss that opportunity.
So when we've been wronged, we don't want to miss the opportunity
to imitate Jehovah by forgiving freely.
Please notice how this is highlighted at Colossians chapter 3 verse 13.
When we consider Job's example, remember that Jehovah instructed him to pray for
his companions, and that helped Job display a forgiving spirit.
Well, notice here what Jehovah instructs us to do.
Colossians 3 13.
Continue putting up with one another
and forgiving one another freely,
even if anyone has a cause for a complaint against another.
Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also do the same.
The Greek verb used here for freely forgive
is related to a word often rendered undeserved kindness or favor.
When used in the sense of forgiving, this verb conveys the idea of doing so
freely, generously. Just as when you, out of generosity, give a gift to someone.
Jehovah requires that we freely forgive others in imitation of him.
Did you notice the end of the verse? You must also do the same.
Now, if the offense is minor, it's best to overlook it.
1 Corinthians 13 verse 5 states that love does not keep account of the injury,
and Proverbs 19 verse 11 tells us that it is beauty to overlook an offense.
However, if we feel that we need to talk to our brother or sister about an offense that was
committed against us, what's the best way to handle that?
First, we should ask Jehovah in prayer for his guidance.
Then, with the brother's good qualities in mind,
graciously tell him that we want to make peace.
Listen carefully and empathetically.
We shouldn't interrupt, even if we don't agree with everything being said.
It may be that his viewpoint is wrong, but it is his viewpoint.
Then, when it's our turn to speak, we want to be gracious.
Tell the brother what we appreciate about him.
Apologize for any part that we played in the misunderstanding.
If our humble efforts result in good, thank Jehovah.
If they don't, keep asking Jehovah for guidance while we look for another
opportunity to make peace. When we truly forgive,
we make a heartfelt decision to let go of resentment,
and what peace that can bring us. Now, forgiving doesn't mean that we approve
of a wrong action, consider it unimportant, or pretend it didn't happen.
Also, if we've been treated unjustly and have a cause for complaint,
we do what we can to pursue peace and resolve the matter,
and then we confidently leave it in Jehovah's hands.
Brothers and sisters, what will you take away from this consideration?
I'm sure you'll agree that it can be a challenge at times to forgive.
But rather than be like the man we spoke of earlier who refused to forgive his
own daughter, may we follow the examples of Jehovah,
Jesus, Job, and Haley, by forgiving freely,
generously. Remember, a chance to forgive
is a chance to imitate Jehovah, and we wouldn't want to miss that opportunity.
May all of us pursue peace by being willing to forgive freely.
For the Garrett Loche, a member of the governing body will now present the final
talk of this symposium. Seek peace and pursue it
by using our gift of speech wisely.
Why is it challenging to use our gift of speech wisely?
Because something powerful constantly works against us.
What is it? Imperfection.
The tongue is powerful. It can do much good, but because of imperfection,
it can also cause much harm.
This thought is well expressed in the Bible book of Proverbs.
For example, Proverbs 12, 18 says,
Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of sword,
but the tongue of the wise is healing.
In Proverbs 18, 21 states, death and life are in the power of the tongue.
Those who love to use it will eat its fruitage.
Words have power, so we need to be careful about what we say
and how we say it. Perhaps you can recall when someone spoke
unkindly to you and hurt you deeply.
On the other hand, thoughtful speech can mend an aching heart and heal friendships.
Because of imperfection, we all have difficulty controlling our tongue.
This was true even of the first century disciple James.
He humbly acknowledged the challenge that all humans face
in the third chapter of his inspired letter.
Notice how James described this in James chapter 3
verses 3 to 6 and verse 8.
If we put bridles in the mouth of horses to make them obey us,
we guide also their whole body. Look also at chips.
Although they are so big and are driven by strong winds,
they are steered by a very small rudder wherever the man at the helm is
inclined to go. So too, the tongue is a small part of the body
and yet it makes great brags. See how small a fire it takes to set a great
forest ablaze? The tongue is also a fire.
The tongue represents a world of unrighteousness among our body members.
For it defiles all the body and sets the whole course of life on fire
and it is set on fire by Gehenna.
And verse 8, but no human can tame the tongue.
It is unruly and injurious, full of deadly poison.
In addition to inherited imperfection, our upbringing could also be a factor.
The watchtower of September 15, 2006, page 21, paragraph 6 states,
In addition to human imperfection, family environment plays a role in the misuse of the tongue.
Some people were raised in homes where parents were not open to any agreement,
without self-control, fears. Despite such challenges,
it is possible for each one of us to seek peace and pursue it.
Jesus set a good example in using the gift of speech wisely. He used his speech to encourage
and comfort others. While on earth he applied to himself the words
founded Isaiah chapter 61, verse 1, which states the following,
The spirit of the sovereign Lord Jehovah is upon me, because Jehovah
anointed me to declare good news to the meek. He sent me to bind up the broken hearted,
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the wide opening of the eyes to the prisoners.
As recorded at Matthew 12 verse 20, Matthew applies the words of Isaiah 42, 1 to 3,
to Jesus. In Matthew 12 20 he stated,
No bruised read will he crush, and no smoldering wick will he extinguish,
until he brings justice with success. We learn an important lesson from such verses,
Jesus recognized that the tongue has power, power to harm, and power to heal.
The watchtower of February 15, 2015, page 13, and paragraph 11,
thus stated that, quote, Jesus showed discernment in all he said and did.
Can we imitate Jesus more closely? If so, what will you do the next time an opportunity arises
for you to use your gift of speech wisely? In the following dramatization,
notice how the wise use of the tongue helps to heal.
Mind to you! You have a treasure place in your hopeless house,
he will help you out, out, out. He's like a drug, stop.
I was hoping he was using his song, but he's like, you've had a baby.
Baroneca, oh my goodness, she is in love with her own voice.
I just never sat near her at the hall, like she's the only one that can see him.
My first thought, oh no, here we go again. I've seen this movie before.
You don't think she's showing off? Is this just about Ellie?
Seems it's all about Ellie. Is there just a little bit of envy in there?
I've lived it. If it's the case of her being more careful how she comes across, that's another matter.
What did she suggest? I should tell her that she needs to stop.
Can you believe that? Especially as a pioneer. What kind of example is this?
How quickly it snowballs out of control.
You are such lonely. You've got nothing better to do.
How difficult it can be to unravel.
A chance to forgive is a chance to imitate your hover.
Think back to a time when you wanted forgiveness.
Has anyone ever tried talking to her about her singing?
You know what I love about Baroneca? She's probably the most hospitable person I know.
Always open house at her place. And can she cook? Have you tried her curry?
We should use our gift of speech to honor God and to benefit others.
And if somebody gets angry at us, our mild reply can diffuse the situation.
As Proverbs 151 says, a mild answer turns away rage, but a harsh word stirs up anger.
We can also use our gift of speech to console and encourage others.
First, there's Alonians 5, 11 and 14 states.
Therefore, keep encouraging one another and building one another up just as you are in fact doing.
On the other hand, we urge you, brothers, to warn the disorderly, speak consolingly to those
who are depressed, support the weak, be patient toward all.
Yes, even faithful servants of Jehovah may at times struggle with depression.
How can we help such ones?
offer specific genuine commendation to help them see their own value in Jehovah's eyes.
Share with them the powerful words of Bible texts showing that Jehovah truly cares about and
loves those who are broken at heart and crushed in spirit.
We can also use the power of our tongue to provide much needed encouragement to others.
Has a fellow believer lost a loved one in death?
Sympathetic words expressing our care and concern can comfort a grieving heart.
Is an elderly brother or sister feeling unneeded?
A thoughtful tongue can reassure older ones that they are valued and appreciated.
Is someone struggling with the chronic illness?
Kind words shared on the phone or in person can do much to lift the spirits of one who is sick.
How pleased our Creator must be when we use the power of speech to other sayings
that are good for building up.
We may not be able to fix their problems, but we can let them know that we love them and we care
about them. For example, you can arrange to spend time with him or her.
Additionally, we can use God's word to strengthen them.
Or you may notice that someone in the congregation is discouraged or depressed.
You could read an encouraging Bible verse and even offer to say a prayer.
We assure such ones that their brothers and sisters in the congregation love them.
And speak in a way that shows that you really mean and believe what you say.
This symposium has given each one of us much to think about, has it not?
We have been reminded that seeking peace is not always easy.
We have also learned that pursuit of peace requires effort.
In what specific ways are you resolved to seek peace and pursue it and the days ahead?
May we all continue to pursue peace?
One, by not quickly taking offence,
two, by apologizing,
three, by forgiving freely.
And four, by using our gift of speech wisely to encourage and comfort others.
And Major Hover, the God of Peace bless you abundantly for doing so.
Thank you, brothers, for reminding us that the peace we enjoy does not happen by chance.
It requires continuous effort on our part.
But we can succeed with Jehovah's help.
We have now come to the concluding talk of this session.
True Christians come from a variety of backgrounds and cultures.
Individual conscience is differ.
How can we remain united despite these differences?
Please give your attention to Brother David Spain, a member of the governing body,
as he delivers the talk entitled,
Safeguard our United Bond of Peace.
When we think of unity, the words of Psalm 133-1 may come to mind.
Let's read them.
Now, the words aren't going to be on the screen, so let's look them up in the Bible.
I'll give you a moment. That's Psalm 133-1.
It says, look how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity.
Well, we certainly agree with these words of David.
Now, speaking of David, he knew the value of unity.
And we may remember that he didn't always get to experience it in his own life.
The beginning and the end of his reign were marked by civil war,
the fairy opposite of unity.
But you'd think it would have been easy for the Israelites to remain united.
After all, they came from the same roots.
They were all children of Abraham.
They spoke a common language, Hebrew.
And they came from a similar social background.
The ancestors had all been slaves in Egypt,
so there was no basis for anybody to brag about his heritage.
Still, the Israelites found reasons to hate one another.
Israel's first king was from Benjamin.
His second king was from Judah.
That was reason enough to start a war in Israel.
Let's fast forward now to the first century.
Unity is so important that it was on Jesus' mind on the night before he died.
You remember, he prayed to his father that his disciples might be one,
just as he and the father are one.
Now, that could have been a challenge.
Why do we say that?
From a human standpoint, there was no reason for Jesus' disciples to be united.
Unlike the Israelites, they did not have a common ancestor.
They did not have a common mother tongue,
and they came from a variety of social backgrounds.
Think of it.
The first Christians were Jews or Jewish proselytes.
Growing up, they were taught that Gentiles were unclean and they wouldn't even enter the
home of a Gentile, let alone preach to one.
As for Gentile Christians, they came from every nation under heaven.
Most of them knew nothing of the Hebrew language or the Hebrew scriptures.
They'd worshipped false gods.
Some had been highly educated in Athens, Alexandria, or some other center of worldly wisdom.
Others had little formal education.
Yet, when they accepted the truth, Christians became united and at peace with one another.
The Apostle Paul wanted to help them to safeguard that bond of peace.
Now, that's the theme of our discussion this morning.
And we're going to look at his words recorded at Ephesians chapter 4 verses 3 to 6.
And we're going to focus in on a particular expression in these verses.
This is Ephesians chapter 4, I'll give you a moment.
Ephesians chapter 4, and we're going to read verses 3 to 6.
Now, Paul is interested in unity here.
So let's see how he frames his discussion.
He says, earnestly and devoring, so an effort is involved, earnestly and devoring,
to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.
One body there is, and one spirit, just as you recall to the one hope of your calling,
and many emphasizes, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all.
Now, let's go back to verse 3 and look at the expression the uniting bond of peace.
So our discussion is safeguard the uniting bond of peace.
Now, the study Bible has an interesting note on that expression.
It tells us that the word translated uniting bond can also be translated ligament, ligament.
And it is translated ligament in other verses.
Now, we know what an ligament is.
It's a band of strong tissue that holds our bones together.
Also, when we talk about the uniting bond of peace, we mean that peace is the ligament.
It's the tissue that holds God's people together.
That was true in the first century, and it's true today.
Like the early Christians, we come from different backgrounds.
We speak different languages.
Yet Jehovah has shown us how to remain united and at peace.
Now, let's explain what we mean by being united to be united.
Doesn't mean that we all have to like the same things or we all have to think the same on every subject.
There's room for a variety of tastes and opinions.
There's variety on this convention program.
We don't all wear the same style of suit or have the same color of tie.
What about you?
What's your favorite color?
Your favorite food.
Your favorite pet.
In Jehovah's organization, there are dog lovers and cat lovers,
and not everyone likes the same breed of dog or cat.
Have you ever visited someone who has a pet that he thinks is just adorable?
You take one look at the animal and you wonder how anyone could love a face like that.
Yet he does.
People are different, and their pets are grateful for that.
The variety we find among God's people today will continue on into the new world.
Jehovah loves variety.
How many colors are there?
How many species of plants, birds, and animals?
Among God's creation, we find the simple and the complex.
The plain and the fancy.
The sweet and the sour.
The rough and the smooth.
There's great variety among people, even in the new world.
Perfect humans won't have the same personality, talents, and abilities.
You've always wanted to play the violin.
Don't think when you're perfect you'll just be able to pick up a violin and play,
and there's no guarantee you'll be able to play in an orchestra.
Now, one way to maintain unity is to respect the conscience of others.
This is very important, because very often when unity is disturbed,
it's because we don't respect the ability of other brothers and sisters to decide things for themselves.
Now, what do we mean by the conscience?
That's be simple.
It's the faculty that helps us determine right from wrong.
I'm going to repeat that.
The conscience is the faculty to determine right from wrong.
Now, let's consider how our upbringing and our culture
can help shape our personal view of right and wrong.
In some cultures, there are large families.
Conversation around the dinner table is loud.
You can hardly hear yourself think.
The children tease one another and don't hesitate to ask each other personal questions.
The girls borrow each other's clothes, sometimes without asking.
Some people would say that's wrong.
Put the girls, see nothing wrong with it, and neither do their parents.
In other cultures, family members are polite and courteous,
but they don't talk much about their plans or their feelings.
The parents don't often talk about their past because they value their privacy.
Now, some who were raised that way tend to be rather strict with themselves and others.
They have definite views of right and wrong.
They're all there clothes without asking, and they'll say,
that's stealing, I'm calling the elders.
There are no gray areas with them.
Now, there are lots of exceptions, and we're not saying that everyone in a certain culture
fits the bill, but you get the idea.
Now, what do you suppose happens when a publisher from one culture moves into a congregation
where the other culture predominates?
If he doesn't adjust his way of viewing others, he'll be miserable.
Is one way right and the other wrong?
No. Members of both cultures could learn from one another.
Speaking of culture, we might ask ourselves, how do I feel about brothers and sisters
who come from cultures that are very different from my own?
Let me speak with an accent.
Their style of dress may be different.
Their manners and food may not be what we're used to.
Suppose that an elder is younger than we are, or from a different race.
Will we accept his counsel?
Will we ask him for counsel?
Or will we look for an elder who's older and from a similar background?
Will we celebrate our differences or will we allow them to disturb our unity?
So that's one thing, but let's talk about our personal history.
Our personal history can also affect our view of right and wrong.
Some grew up in a household where alcohol was a problem.
Home was not a happy place, and as adults, they stay as far away from alcohol as they can.
And they take a dim view of anyone who uses it, even in moderation.
To them, it's just plain wrong to drink.
Others have only good memories of their childhood home.
At supper time, there was always wine on the table, but nobody ever abused it.
A person who left behind an immoral lifestyle might be extremely sensitive about choices of clothing.
He may be troubled by a clothing style that other brothers and sisters find totally acceptable.
If they're not careful, those who tend to be strict with themselves could impose their
conscience on others. Now let's consider a familiar scenario.
Four publishers are working rural territory in a car group.
Now each home is separated from the next by many miles or kilometers.
At the first call, the driver and her companion get out and the other sisters stay in the car.
They have no choice. There's no place to go.
Now the householder has many questions, and a Bible study is started.
It's noon when the two publishers return to the car. All smiles.
You know what's coming next, don't you?
One of the sisters in the back seat says, well, the two of us can't count
any time this morning. What's she done? She's spoken for herself and for her companion,
and unintentionally she's imposed her own conscience on her friend.
Now she doesn't want to count any time, that's her business. It would be best if she kept
her business to herself. If you've ever visited a foreign country and gone on a guided tour,
probably one of the things the tour guide wanted to show you was the architecture inside a church.
Now some brothers have no problem entering a church if it's part of a tour, because to them
it's no different from visiting a museum. Others, who were strong supporters of false religion,
couldn't enter a church for any reason, not even to attend a wedding or a funeral. To them,
it's just plain wrong. Contrances can differ in this respect, and we have to respect that.
We have to acknowledge that, and we're going to expand on that idea in a moment.
Well, we've hardly scratched the surface when it comes to describing the variety of
personalities and viewpoints in Jehovah's organization. So here's the question,
how can we maintain our unity? Remember what Paul said, earnestly endeavouring
to maintain this perfect bond of unity. It means that we have to put forth effort
to maintain that unity. Well, first of all, it'll help a lot to get well acquainted with
brothers and sisters who think differently from us. Get to know their background. That'll help you
to not to over-react when they take a position that we don't agree with. It'll help us not to judge
them. Now Paul wrote very plainly on that subject, in the words found at Romans chapter 14 and
verse 4. Simple statement, but very powerful. Let's check it out together. Romans chapter 14,
I'll give you a moment, and verse 4. All right, who are you to judge the servant of another?
To his own master, he stands or falls. Indeed, he will be made to stand for Jehovah can make him
stand. Now let's go back and look at that first sentence again. Who are you to judge the servant
of another? We know what a judge does. He declares someone guilty or not guilty. That's not our job.
Jehovah is the judge. If each of us concentrates on his own thinking and his own conscience,
the peace and unity of the congregation will be preserved.
Well, we all want to be balanced when we determine what is right and what is wrong. We want to have
a balanced view of things, a good conscience. So how can we be balanced when determining whether
something is right or wrong? Now in some cases it's easy, the Bible tells us, but in other cases
there's no clear answer. Let's consider a scenario we touched on earlier, the matter of entering
a church. Now that may not be a problem where you live, but in some places it's a real issue.
And remember, these talks are for our worldwide brotherhood, so we're going to consider
a subject that will be a real problem for our menager overcome and we hope that they will benefit
from it. So here's the scenario. Two different sisters are married to men who are not in the truth.
Now in both cases the husband's mother has died. The funeral will be in a church.
One sister decides to go. The other decides against it. The sister who decides to attend
has considered that in that church there will just be a talk by a clergyman. There will be no
congregation singing, congregation prayers or religious gestures. She was never very religious
anyway so none of that would mean anything to her. And her husband and his family will be happy
if she just sits quietly until it's over. Now the second sister has a different set of circumstances.
The service in that church involves participation by the congregation. She used to be an active
member of that church and she's afraid she'll do something she'll regret.
Her husband's family get very emotional at funerals and they're likely to make a scene
if she doesn't participate. So she respectfully tells her husband that her attendance could
cause him embarrassment and declines to attend. You can see that each situation is different.
Now we're going to discuss four questions that we might ask ourselves when we're called upon to
make any difficult decision. And I will repeat the question because if you're taking notes you
may want to write at least the question down. These are very very good questions that we can ask
ourselves before we make a difficult decision. Are you ready? Here's number one. What will make
Jehovah happy? I'll repeat that. What will make Jehovah happy? And that should be our main concern
to please Jehovah. Well how do we know what will make Jehovah happy? We identify the Bible
principles that have a bearing on the situation. One way we can do that is by checking the index
or the research guide. What are some scriptural principles assistive who's married to an unbeliever
might consider when deciding whether to attend a funeral in a church? Can you think of some?
What about 1 Peter 3 verse 1? Lives be in subjection to your husbands. Jehovah is pleased when a
Christian woman respects her husband whether he's in the truth or not. But a wife's subjection
is relative. She's dedicated to Jehovah, not to her husband. She's dedicated to Jehovah, not
to her husband. So that's 1 Peter 3.1. What about Isaiah 52 and verse 11?
Touch nothing unclean. Keep yourselves clean. Under the mosaic law, if someone so much has
touched something unclean, he became unclean. Many brothers and sisters would find it very
hard to sit quietly while a clergyman told lies about the condition of the dead. To them it would
be touching something unclean. Others might compare that to a young person in school sitting quietly
while his teacher tells lies about the origin of life. If someone does decide to attend a
funeral in a church, he or she should be absolutely determined not to participate in any religious
ritual whether singing hymns or so much as saying e-men to a prayer that a clergyman offers.
Remember the goal? To please Jehovah. So the first point was what makes Jehovah happy? Number two,
number two, how might my choice affect others? Have you got that? How might my choice affect others?
We would never want to stumble anyone. Even in a family matter such as attending a wedding or
a funeral in a church which we may consider as a personal matter, we need to weigh the effect our
decision could have on others. It could affect them in one of two ways. Now the first is the
obvious way. In some areas of a witness even entered a church, his brothers and sisters would lose
respect for him. But there's a second way the witness could stumble someone. He might be able to
attend the funeral and make no compromise. But suppose a new brother decided to follow his example
when a family member died. The Drew brother could give in to family pressure and participate in
idolatry. How tragic is that? The Apostle Paul never worshipped idols. So when meat that had been
offered to an idol went up for sale on a meat market, it probably didn't bother Paul's conscience
to buy it because he knew that an idol is nothing. But some of his brothers had worshipped those
very idols before coming into the truth. They could have felt guilty about eating that meat. To
them it would be like having a communion meal with an idol. The feelings of his brothers were
important to Paul. He was willing to sacrifice his own rights for the sake of his brothers.
We'd never want to take the unloving view that if our brother is stumbled by what we do,
it's too bad for him. On the other hand, if we're the type of person who is often stumbled by
what others do, we need to ask Jehovah to help us gain a more balanced viewpoint. So far, we've
discussed the need to make Jehovah happy and to consider the feelings of our brothers. What's next?
Number three, have I asked for counsel? Have you got that? Have I asked for counsel?
Now maybe the elders haven't dealt with the exact situation we're facing, but they know a lot of
people. They may know someone who has dealt with the situation before and seen how we handled it.
Or they may know about the effect the decision had on others. For example, they might know how the
congregation reacted the last time someone attended a wedding or a funeral in a church.
Another situation where brothers often ask for the help of the elders involves the use of
blood fractions. Should we accept them or not? The governing body has refused to impose its conscience
on the brotherhood. What do we know? We know that the Bible says to abstain from blood.
But as you divide it into fractions, and the fractions get tinier and tinier, at what point does
blood stop being blood? Each one will have to decide that for himself. Now some might say, well,
if it's a really, really tiny fraction, it doesn't bother me to take it. But others will say,
it doesn't matter to me if it's from blood, I don't want it. And their conscience also has to be
respected. Now let's illustrate. Air is made up of nitrogen and oxygen. And together,
they make up 99 percent of air. That leaves 1 percent. The 1 percent is made up of a variety of
gases, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, neon, small fractions. When it comes to small fractions, elders
need to be careful, though, not to insert their personal opinion into the discussion, such as by
saying, I wouldn't take any of it. They should simply help the publisher to reason on the basic
principles and let him make up his own mind. So where are we? We make sure, hold the happy. We
consider the feelings of our brothers and sisters. We ask for counsel. Number four, did I take the time?
Did I take the time to meditate prayerfully before making my decision?
Your goal is to make Jehovah happy. So you wouldn't want to make your decision hastily and then
ask Jehovah to bless it. We should ask Jehovah for guidance first, rather than asking him to bless
a decision we've already made. Have you ever heard someone say, that doesn't bother my conscience?
We might ask, how did he come to that conclusion? Did he follow the four steps we just mentioned?
Did he do research to learn what makes Jehovah happy? Did he think about how others might be
affected? Did he ask for counsel? And did he meditate prayerfully on his decision? Or is he just
following his feelings? Following your feelings isn't the same as following a Bible-trained
conscience. I'm going to repeat that. Following your feelings is not the same as following a
Bible-trained conscience. Our conscience needs to be trained in harmony with scriptural principles.
Now, Paul's counsel conscience didn't bother him a bit when he was persecuting Christians. He
thought he was doing Jehovah favor. But when he realized how Jehovah felt about it, he knew he
had to change. We have to be sure that we're really getting Jehovah's thinking on matters.
Remember Jeremiah 17 and verse 9. Simple expression but so true. Jeremiah chapter 17
and verse 9. It says, the heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate. Who can know it?
The heart is treacherous. We might allow our emotions to get the better of us. For example,
when a family member is disfellowshipped. If the person is living outside the home, we know that we
should limit our association to necessary family business. Now, if the family was never very close,
that might not be a problem. But suppose family ties are really strong. That can be a challenge.
If we allow ourselves to be ruled by emotion rather than by scriptural principles,
we could stretch the meaning of necessary family business to include almost any activity.
The heart is treacherous.
Asking ourselves the four questions we just mentioned can help us to make decisions based on
godly principles rather than simply relying on our feelings. Now, let's see how mature Christians
can apply these principles and how the elders can help. The following video interviews are about
weddings and funerals, a touchy subject and many cultures, as you will see.
In Japan, religious rituals are associated with each stage of life and with each season of the year.
As Jehovah's Witnesses, we want to keep the cleanliness and unity of the congregation.
In this regard, one of the most delicate areas is the decision on whether to attend a
non-Witness funeral or not. The first thing we must consider regarding funerals is not to be
involved in religious rituals, the acts of worship that are condemned by the Bible. In harmony with
the principle of the 2 Corinthians chapter 6 and verse 14, we need to keep completely separate
from pagan acts of worship. Next, even if we don't participate in the worship of other religions,
we need to consider if our decisions could stumble someone in the congregation.
When we consider the Bible principle in Luke chapter 17, verse 2, we do not want our decisions to
hinder the faith of someone in the congregation. The third point to think about is our conscience.
We need to seriously think about the Bible principle in Galatians chapter 6, verse 5,
where it says that each must carry his own load. This Bible principle also applies when elders
want to support others. Of course, those in the congregation can ask the elders for support
in issues related to funerals. However, in matters of conscience, elders cannot force decisions
on others. So it would be wrong to make some kind of rule regarding attending non-Witness funerals.
If each person can make decisions based on Bible principles, we can have a truly peaceful and free
atmosphere, where each individual's differing situation is respected. This would really contribute
to the unity of the congregation, and all can maintain a clean conscience and serve happily
before Jehovah. In my culture, specifically the Namibian-Oshihuambo culture, like in many African
cultures, there are many spurtistic customs related to weddings that are included in wedding
celebrations. Unfortunately, my family is not in the truth. So obviously for Ben and I, that was
one of the main concerns. They don't understand our worship of Jehovah and they don't understand
that we apply Bible principles and not a tradition of men. We got engaged before the pandemic,
but obviously now that our wedding was to be over video conferencing, it meant that we didn't have
control over many things. We tried to imagine situations that could stumble our
brothers or disrupt the unity in the congregation. We had to, in advance, think of Bible principles
that would apply in our case, but particularly what we also found helpful was speaking to a mature
elder. He gave us a principle in Proverbs 14, verse 15. He told us to be very careful when people say,
I will do this or I won't do this at your wedding. Basically, it was up to us to make sure that
the proceedings or things that happened at our wedding would be in order and in harmony with
Bible principles. Another principle that came to mind was first Corinthians 10, verse 23.
So obviously we knew that we had the right to do many things, but we were also very conscious of
how our brothers would view our wedding. We didn't want anybody to be at our wedding and feel embarrassed
or even stumble to be there. Now looking back at our wedding, we look back with fond memories.
So applying Bible principle doesn't restrict our fun. Also it contributed to the unity
among our brothers because all of us, those prisons, those who were invited, we were able to enjoy
the wedding. You're not worried about, oh, did that thing offend anybody? So you're able to
and enjoy the day without any bad memories. As you can see, our brothers in many countries are
faced with very difficult decisions where weddings and funerals are concerned. The guidance
the elders can provide is invaluable. Now sometimes medical doctors complain that their
witness patients are inconsistent because we don't all have the same view of certain medical
treatments. One witness patient accepts certain fractions or therapies, so the doctor figures
he knows what Jehovah's Witnesses believe. But then the next patient comes along and he rejects
them all. The doctor is confused. Those doctors don't understand the role of the conscience.
We shouldn't worry when medical professionals don't understand our differing viewpoints because
we should be glad that we serve a God who dignifies us with the freedom to make many of our own
decisions. Now the Apostle Paul mentioned four qualities that will help us to maintain the
uniting bond of peace. And we're going to find those qualities at Ephesians chapter 4 and we're
going to zero in on verse 2. Let's turn to Ephesians chapter 4 and we're going to look at verse 2.
Now we read verses 3 to 6 earlier and you know that Paul was concerned about unity. Unity is what
he had on his mind. And now he's telling us that these four qualities are going to help us to
maintain our unity, earnestly endeavoring. Remember what he said, earnestly endeavoring to maintain
the oneness of the Spirit, the work that we need to put into promoting unity. Verse 2 with all
humility and mildness with patience putting up with one another in love. Isn't that beautiful?
You notice the qualities, humility, mildness, patience and love. When we're humble we recognize
that our opinion isn't always the right one. Humility will also prevent us from trying to impose
our conscience on others as if Jehovah had appointed us to judge them. What about mildness?
Mildness will help us to think about the effect our words might have on our brothers and sisters.
We would never want to hurt them even when we strongly disagree with them and we should give
them the benefit of the doubt. If someone says something that makes you mad, pray before you speak.
Pray before you speak. Love covers a multitude of sins which contributes to the peace of the congregation.
And we deeply appreciate it when our brothers are patient with us. In turn, we need to be patient
with them because we're all at different stages of spiritual growth and we have to acknowledge that.
Well, we've talked about making Jehovah happy with our decisions. We can also please Jehovah
when we work hard to promote peace in the congregation. And sometimes it does take an earnest
endeavor sometimes we have to work hard at ensuring that the congregation is at peace. What about
the elders? The elders take the lead in working together in unity. They should always speak with
the united voice. If they don't, the congregation will sense that they're divided and this will make
the brothers and sisters uneasy. Any difference of opinion should we work down in private while showing
deep respect for one another. Just because someone disagrees with us doesn't make him a bad person,
we have to understand that. And his difference of opinion may search us through it. It may be
something that we need to think about and consider. And we always consider that the other person
may be right. What about us publishers? If we're having a hard time getting along with someone,
rather than asking Jehovah to change him, we should ask Jehovah to mold us like the great
potter he is. We should ask him to show us why he drew that person to the congregation. Remember
what Jesus said? No one comes to him unless the father draws him. What does Jehovah see in that person
that we aren't seeing? We each have a responsibility to contribute to the peace and unity of the
congregation. May Jehovah bless us as we work toward that goal. Thank you, brother,
explain for that motivating talk. We are determined to do our part to safeguard our
uniting bond of peace. This session has provided such practical lessons. What can we look forward to
in the next session? The Scripture theme will be Romans chapter 15 verse 13, which says in part,
may the God who gives hope, fill you with all joy and peace. The program will feature a seven-part
symposium with Bible examples of those who sowed and reaped peace. We will also want to invite
as many as possible to enjoy the public Bible discourse entitled Friendship with God. How possible?
Now let's sing together song number 113, which draws attention to what it means to have
godly peace. The song is entitled Our Possession of Peace. After the song, you may have your local
concluding prayer. Again, that song number 113.